>> Hello, I'm
Georgia Shakti-Hill.
And I want to welcome you
to "Living in Balance."
Our subject today is about
relationship and health,
and we are going to look
at it from the perspective
of the power of now.
Come join us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Eckhart Tolle has been
described as the modern mystic.
He is the author of
"The Power of Now,"
and I've asked him if he
would talk with us today
about the power of now
and how we can relate it
on such a practical and
important level as relationship
and also about our
health and suffering.
So that is the subject.
You are the author of this
wonderful book that thousands
of people have read, and
also, thousands of people
have been drawn to come
and listen to you talk.
You are a guru to some, and
you said, I liked your analogy.
You're a window through
which the light can shine.
>> Yes, people don't
really come to see me.
They come to see that which
comes through this form.
It's everybody's destiny
to come a little bit more
transparent to the light of
consciousness shining through,
and so people come to be
more fully with themselves
rather than come to see another
person when they come to talks.
>> And I've asked if we could
concentrate on relationship.
I just loved your
information that you
shared through the "Power
of Now" about relationship.
It puts it in such
a perspective.
And you mentioned
it as relationship
as practice in spirituality
or spiritual practice,
how we can work with
our relationships
from that perspective.
And we have so many that
are painful, so many
that are addictive, and that
have a negative aspect to them,
but they don't have
to be like that.
They should not be.
>> No, it seems that
relationships are a great
source of both pleasure and
suffering for many people.
And many people have
experienced how easily
the pleasure of a relationship
can turn into suffering
and how quickly that
can happen, how easily
it seems that love can turn
into hate in relationships.
It can happen within a second.
And so there's a source
of great suffering there
for many people.
Why is it that there's so much
conflict in relationships?
And does it have to be that way?
So we need to look at what the
source of that conflict may be.
Now most people
experience periodic drama
in their relationships, once
a week, every other day,
depending on the relationship.
>> And we can become addicted to
the drama itself because it is
emotional, it is intense,
and we experience it.
And even if it's
painful, it's intense.
>> Yes, there is something
that one could almost call
an addiction to suffering
in most human beings,
but that's mostly unconscious
or they don't know that they are
addicted to suffering.
And what that is is
not so much caused--
it seemingly caused
by the relationship,
but the fact is that human
beings over thousands
of years of history
have created so much
suffering for themselves.
If you look at
human history, you
see the atrocities,
almost continuous warfare
that's been going on.
So that has left traces in the
human collective consciousness,
and those are residues
of past human suffering.
Even the planet itself
carries an energy
field of suffering collectively
in a collective psyche.
>> Through all these generations
and ancestors we've known.
>> Yes, and I call
that the pain body.
So it's a residue of
past emotional suffering,
both the past of humanity
and your own personal past
because every child suffers
in one way or another.
So all the emotional
suffering that you go to
is added to the pain
body, the emotional sphere
of suffering that you've already
come into this world with.
So this pain body--
now I'm going to look
at it for a moment
as if it were almost
an independent entity,
it's an emotional energy
field that lives in you,
and the pain body is
not always active.
It has a dormant period
when you can hardly feel it
and everything seems to be fine.
And then it has an
active period when
it needs to come up and feed
again, add to its suffering
by creating more suffering.
So this pain body that
people carry inside
from the past, past
emotion, periodically
comes out of its
dormant state and seeks
some further
experience of suffering
because that is the energy
vibration that it feeds on.
So the first thing that happens,
a little trigger awakens
the pain body, something
relatively insignificant
happens.
Perhaps in your
relationship, your partner
says something, makes a
comment, and suddenly, there's
an enormous reaction
out of proportion
to the significance of
the triggering effect,
and the pain body came up
because it needed to feed.
So the pain body
feeds into ways.
It feeds on your mind by
rising up into your thoughts
and making your thought
processes very negative.
They become negative
and self-destructive,
destructive of self or others.
So every negative thought has
a certain frequency vibration
to it, which corresponds to the
emotional frequency of the pain
body.
And some pain bodies are
predominantly angry pain
bodies.
Other pain bodies are
predominantly sad or extremely
turbulent or fearful.
>> But we all know
that pain body.
And we know how it can come
up, and it's disproportionate,
as you said, to what has
actually happened to us.
But we can dissolve
the pain body.
>> Yes, now the pain
body will try to feed,
to add to its energy.
It wants you to
completely identify
with that energy field
that represents that it is,
so it will feed on your mind.
But in relationships,
it will also
feed on reactions, your
partner's reactions.
It will unconsciously--
of course,
you don't know that when
you identified with it.
You don't know that this
is what you're doing.
You will try to make
your partner react
in a certain way that
feeds your pain body,
also by provoking
anger, for example.
And it's done unconsciously,
so the reaction, your partner's
reaction, will be
feeding your pain body,
and that is what I call the need
for drama in a relationship.
>> You know what I like about
this too is once you think
of this pain body as
a separate entity,
that you detach from it--
and you literally then
can detach from it?
>> Yes, when you
know it is not you,
it loses its personal nature.
So, kind of, the pain that you
experience periodically then
becomes depersonalized.
It's no longer my pain, my
identity, my painful story,
but simply you know that
it is human pain that
lives in you because
there's really nothing
personal about these feelings.
Anger is not a personal anger.
It's human anger.
It's the same in every human
being, the same feeling.
Sadness is the same
feeling of sadness.
Fear is fear.
But people personalize
it completely,
so the emotion
energizes and amplifies
the mind-made sense of
self, which then becomes
a very fearful or angry one.
>> It's mentioned that women
especially experience this
because we really
empathize with,
we have that history
of the women of Afghan,
of Afghanistan, that had to
wear the burqas and the way that
women have been tortured
and because they're smaller,
and they've been
raped and so forth.
So there is part of that is
part of this whole culture
in the whole pain
body of the race.
>> Yes, there is a collective
aspect to pain body in that
sense that certain countries
have a heavier collective pain
body in other countries, and
those tend to be countries
where many atrocities or
continuous warfare has
happened.
In Eastern Europe, if you go
to east European countries,
and sometimes central
European countries,
you can often sense there's a
certain heaviness in the energy
field, and that is the
collective pain body.
Another aspect of the
collective pain body
is that certain races who
have suffered a lot also
have accumulated a stronger
collective pain body.
And women who have been victims,
really, for thousands of years
also have a collective female
pain body that I point--
I've talked about
in the book that it
tends to come up particularly
before menstruation in women,
and there's suddenly
great emotional turmoil.
And it can take you over so
easily when you become totally
identified with it,
and you're forced
to act it out again and again.
So how do--
>> Monthly basis.
[LAUGHS]
>> Yes.
Not that men don't
have a pain body.
They also have a pain body, but
there's the collective aspect
of the female pain body.
So once you know that,
then you can actually
bring more presence into
it and simply observe
that movement, that turbulence,
or that heaviness inside you,
so it doesn't control
your thinking anymore.
You simply feel the turbulence
or the heaviness inside you
and watch it, so you bring
a certain amount of presence
to it, and that is
bringing the power of now
into those emotions that are
part of the human pain body.
And that is the arising,
really, of a new state,
a deeper, or higher state
of consciousness that is not
conditioned, that has the
ability to simply witness what
is taking place.
>> And that shifts that
whole consciousness.
>> That shifts it, and you
are no longer feeling it.
When you know that
that's what it
is, it's less likely that
the pain body can move
into your mind, force you to
think certain thoughts, which,
of course, will be negative,
and it's also less likely
that the pain body will
make you use your partner
to give you more pain in its
need to reenact this drama.
>> Over and over, the drama.
Ah!
We will be back in just a moment
with more of Eckhart Tolle
and the power of now
with your health.
And if you are just joining
us, I'm Georgia Shakti-Hill,
and we're talking
with Eckhart Tolle.
"The Power of Now" is his
book, and the practices
that you can learn
from "The Power of Now"
can really assist
you in becoming
a healthy, balanced person.
As you know, stress is what
makes our lives so difficult
and can bring on illness.
One technique or practice that
is so profound is surrender.
It even affects the aging
process, does it not?
>> Yes, surrender is acceptance
of this moment as it is
because you realized the
futility of that state of inner
resistance to what is, to simply
make this moment your friend
rather than your enemy.
And then you
realize that perhaps
for many years, the
now, the present moment,
you've treated it as an enemy,
trying to get away from it,
not liking it, constantly
criticizing it.
So this transformation of
no longer internally trying
to escape from or deny
the aliveness that
is in this moment
that also brings
about a transformation
in the physical body,
because a lot of the contraction
that people sense, that which
stops the healthy
flow of life energy
through the body
what is called chi,
that which stops that is the
state of fearful contraction
that is there and how does--
where does that originate,
it's because you never
embrace this moment as it is.
You mentally project
yourself forward
to some possible future moment.
And in that gap between
now and later, fear arises.
The fear makes
the body contract,
and that greatly impedes
the flow of life energy
through the body.
>> You mentioned continue
to say yes, say yes to life,
say yes to now, say yes
to what is going on.
It really is a matter
of acceptance and going
with, kind of, the
flow of your life.
And if you are in fear, then
that's when the blockages come.
But the acceptance of the now.
OK, so we accept it.
We actually embrace it.
>> The now and life are one
because there is no life
outside of now.
So when you look at it, most
people live in past and future,
rarely in the now, so they live
in a conceptualized universe
because now is
all there ever is.
Nothing ever
happened in the past.
It happened in the now.
Nothing will ever
happen in the future.
It will happen the now.
So when you realize
how vital it is,
then you open yourself up to
an enormous power that is here
all the time that
you cut yourself
off from when you live in and
through mental projections
of past and, for many
people, future, mostly.
>> Now a lot of people will--
oh, maybe they'll do astrology,
or they'll do I Ching,
or they'll do the
tarot, or they will
do some form of divination.
And is it because they really
are not satisfied or not living
in the now, and they're
projecting into the future,
they want to see what
the future holds?
Is it either dissatisfaction
with what is?
>> Well, they want
to, in some way,
perhaps control what is
going to happen to them.
They want to know--
but, of course, if you knew
what is going to happen to you,
your life would lose
all sense of adventure.
It would-- everything
would be totally fixed.
So it's simply-- the most
powerful spiritual practice
is the practice of now.
>> Be in the moment as
the Sufi master would say.
That's why they dance.
That's why they whirl.
It brings you into the moment.
And there are practices
that do that now.
Some of the things--
one thing that you suggested
was the inner body.
And tell me about
that and how people
can come from the inner
body and come into the now,
be in the now.
>> Most people are cut off from
the aliveness of their body
because all their attention
is absorbed continuously
by thought processes there.
In other words, they're
completely in the head.
That center of gravity, so
to speak, is in the mind,
in their continuous
stream of thinking.
And what are they
thinking about?
Probably the next
moment, the future.
They're projecting
themselves forward,
trying to control
it in some way,
trying to prevent certain
things from happening,
and so they lose themselves
in the mind and in time,
in future.
So a very powerful practice
is to bring your attention
from the head into
the body and to feel
the aliveness that
is always present
throughout your entire body.
And it can start
with a simple thing,
like sensing the aliveness
that is in your hand.
And at first, some people say,
well, I can't feel anything.
And I sometimes point
out, yes, you can.
Just close your eyes,
hold up your right hand,
and without moving your hand
and without looking at it,
is there any way you can know
whether your right hand is
still there?
And then they do that,
and suddenly, they
can feel the energy
in their right hand.
They can sense it, and
they're beginning now
to enter the body
with their attention.
And in the same way that you
can feel the aliveness there,
you can very easily
feel the aliveness that
is in the rest of the
body and then sense it
as a general flow of aliveness.
Every cell is alive, and that
takes your attention away from
the mind, and also brings you
into the now because you cannot
be inhabiting the bodies,
one way of putting it,
truly inhabiting the body
when you inhabit the body,
you cannot be away from the now
that is an anchor for staying
present, and that is a state of
great power because we may not
realize how much
intelligence is actually--
how much intelligence
lives in the body
and in every cell of the body.
If you had to control
the workings of the body
through your mind, the body
would break down immediately
because it's far too complex.
Only the intelligence in the
body that is in every cell
and in every organ can make
the body function in that way.
So the greater intelligence
that is there--
the one intelligence that is
there of which the human mind
is only a tiny
aspect, how do you
connect with that
one intelligence
that runs the entire universe?
The easiest way to
connect with that
is to start by connecting
with your inner body.
>> Now many people are
suffering with disease.
And we know that through pain
and through disease and impact
and trauma, we often do evolve.
However, how can we transform
illness and suffering?
What can we do with
the power of now
to transform illness
and suffering?
>> If illness is already
there, see that you don't form
an identity out of your illness.
You don't make an
identity out of it.
You identify with it
so much that you--
the image forms
in your mind of me
as a person who has that
or is a sufferer of that.
So simply bring it down to
this moment and the reality
of this moment.
So when I speak of
surrendering to an illness,
I'm not saying surrender to
the fact that you are ill.
That's a mental image.
Simply surrender to whatever
this moment presents
and that maybe at
this moment, pain.
It may be disability.
It may be discomfort.
And an illness can become
your spiritual teacher
because it can teach you
the state of surrender,
to say yes to what
is, not to resist it.
Enormous healing
powers are released
when you enter the stage
of nonresistance, which
has nothing to do with
resignation and saying,
oh, I might just well accept.
I'm not going to get any better.
Nothing to do with that.
You simply accept the
reality of this moment
as it is without constructing
a mental story on top of it.
Simply this, the
pain is there, so let
the pain teach you surrender.
That's how the egoic
entity, the mind-made self
can actually become
eroded through an illness,
and it has happened.
I have met people who have
had severe disability,
and they were in
their wheelchair,
perhaps totally incapacitated,
and I looked into their eyes,
and there was an enormous
light shining through,
an enormous aliveness.
They had surrendered
to their condition.
And then I met others
in the same condition,
there was great bitterness
and anger and resentment.
They were-- they
had closed down.
And so healing is
more likely to happen,
much more likely to happen
in the surrendered state.
>> If that tenseness is
gone, the anger that--
>> All healing powers
are released in the state
of openness, that is
the state of surrender,
because the state of
nonsurrender is the state
of closeness, shutting down,
contraction, tightness.
>> So the power of now can be--
that we can actually put
ourselves in a healing state,
being open to healing.
>> Yes, so the power of now is
always connected with working
with whatever is at this moment,
not demanding that your life
should be different, not
being antagonistic towards
the reality of this moment.
>> Just render to the moment.
Thank you, Eckhart.
If you would like to be
in touch with Eckhart,
and you know we always love
to hear from you, stay tuned,
and we'll let you
know how, and then
we'll be back with
a parting thought.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Living in this
moment, accepting what
is can change our relationships,
can change our health,
then we can truly
live in balance
in mind, body, and spirit.
Until next time.
I'm Georgia Shakti-Hill.
May you be well, happy,
and peaceful, and may
you have the power of now.
[MUSIC PLAYING]